Results
Without knowing the exact algorithm and sets of initial conditions used by Hastings and Powell in order to solve the ordinary differential equations (Eq. 9-12), we were able to replicate their main findings.
## (replace by) We were able to replicate Hastings & Powell's main findings, even without knowing their exact algorithm and sets of initial conditions.
First, our time series of the nondimensional variables (fig. 1 (a-c)) present similar patterns as those identified by Hastings and Powell. We observed that the standardized population densities of $x$, $y$, and $z$ (Eq. 5-7) oscillate in a period of around 125 time steps.
In a cycle, the population densities of species X and Y oscillate while that of species Z grows. At the point where z reaches its local maximum, defined above (see methods) as its maximum value within the cycle, and where y and x reach their local minimum and maximum values, respectively, z declines until it reaches its local minimum. This is the "handle" of the teacup (fig. 1 (d)). Subsequently, another cycle begins.
## (replace by) Within a cycle, the population densities of species $x$ and $y$ oscillate while that of species $z$ grows until it reaches its primary local maximum (see definition in methods), at which y and x respectively reach their local minimum and maximum values. $z$ then declines until it reaches its local minimum, forming the "handle" of the teacup (fig. 1 (d)), and subsequently beginning a new cycle.
We produced an animated figure that illustrates this dynamic (see supp. online material).
Furthermore, the discrepancies between our results and those of Hastings and Powell do not seem to strongly influence the above-mentioned period length, nor the values of the local maxima and minima of our dimensionless variables. Indeed, x varies approximately from 0.2 to 1.0, y from 0.0 to 0.4, and z from 7.5 to 10.5, as seen in the time interval shown in fig (b1 = 3.0).
## (replace by) Although slight discrepancies exist between our results and those of Hastings & Powell, they do not seem to strongly influence the above-mentioned period length, nor the values of the local maxima and minima of the dimensionless variables. Indeed, x varies approximately from 0.2 to 1.0, y from 0.0 to 0.4, and z from 7.5 to 10.5 (fig. 1), as seen in the original paper.
## (remove this, I'm not sure what you meant and I don't find it relevant) The difference in shapes of the phase plots are mainly due to the choices of axis tick intervals and to the angles of the three-dimensional plots.

Second, the first values of the time series of x (fig. 2) are almost identical to those of Hastings and Powell approximately until t = 250. Beyond this threshold, the trajectories seem to increasingly diverge from those of the authors. This is not surprising since the initial conditions we used (x = 0.77 : solid line ; x = 0.78 : dash line) were distinct, although similar, to the ones used by Hastings and Powell, which were not mentioned in their article. This further supports the chaotic behaviour of the model system where different initial conditions ultimately lead to different trajectories.
## (replace by, I've rearranged the order of the ideas) Second, the time series of $x$ from $t = 0$ to $500$ supports the chaotic behavior of the system, with slightly different initial conditions leading to increasingly different trajectories. The values themselves are almost identical to Hastings & Powell's until $t \approx 250$, at which point they start to diverge, but this behavior is to be expected without the exact same initial conditions.

## (little tweaks)
Third, our bifurcation diagrams (fig. 3) have the same general shapes as the ones of Hastings & Powell, and are in the same range of $z_{max}$. We identified most of the local maxima of $z$ found in the original paper for $b_1$ ranging from 2.2 to 6.2. However, we missed some of them and we found others that were absent in their paper. For instance, for $b_1$ = 3.1, we found multiple local maxima of $z$, whereas Hastings & Powell had only found a dichotomy of values. The differences are even more apparent in fig. 3 (c), which represents a detailed portion of fig. 3 (a). For example, contrary to their findings, we did identify local maxima values for b1 ranging from 2.30 and 2.35. In other words, we did not observe the significant gap in the bifurcation diagram that they had found.

## (adding section on the b2 bifurcation diagram)
Our additional bifurcation diagrams, where we varied $b_2$ instead of $b_1$ (fig. S1), confirm that chaos occurs for values other than $b_2$ = 2.0. Chaos is apparent for both smaller or greater values. However, while Hastings & Powell reported that chaos was more likely for greater values, our results highlight that $z$ instead converges to a single value and starts to crash past $b_2$ = 2.35.

Lastly, although Hastings and Powell did not specify the equation of the plane that crosses the trajectories of the phase plot at its "handle", we were able to accurately replicate their Poincaré section and map for $b_1$ = 3.0 (fig. 4 (a, b)). The main discordance lies in the number of points that cross the plane, and consequently on the apparent smoothness of the graphs. On the contrary, it was harder to precisely replicate the Poincaré map for $b_1$ = 6.0 (fig. 4 (d)), even though the corresponding reproduced Poincaré section (fig. 4 (c)) was similar to the one in Hastings & Powell's paper.


## (put variables in equations format)
Figure 1: Time series of the nondimensional variables (a) $x$, (b) $y$ and (c) $z$, for $t$ ranging from 5000 to 6500 ($x$ = 1.0, $y$ = 1.0, and $z$ = 1.0 as initial conditions). (d) Three-dimensional phase plot, for $t$ ranging from 1 to 10000 ($x$ = 0.7, $y$ = 0.2, and $z$ = 8.0 as initial conditions). The parameter values used in the simulations are given in Table 1 ($b_1$ = 3.0). This figure replicates fig. 2 of Hastings & Powell.
Figure 2: Time series of $x$, for $t$ ranging from 0 to 500. The solid and dash lines have  $x$ = 0.77 and $x$ = 0.78 as initial conditions respectively ($y$ = 0.16 and $z$ = 9.9 as initial conditions are unchanged). The parameter values used in the simulations are given in Table 1 (b1 = 3.0). This figure replicates fig. 3 of Hastings & Powell.
Figure 3: Bifurcation diagrams of the local maxima of z plotted against b1 ranging from (a) 2.2 to 3.2, (b) 3.0 to 6.2, and (c) 2.25 to 2.6. The other parameter values used in the simulations are given in Table 1 ($x$ = 1.0, $y$ = 1.0, and $z$ = 1.0 as initial conditions). This figure replicates fig. 4 of Hastings & Powell.
Figure 4: (a) and (b) Poincaré section and map, respectively, for the parameter values given in Table 1 ($b1$ = 3.0).  (c) and (d) Poincaré section and map for the same parameter values except b1 = 6.0. All sets of initial values are unchanged ($x$ = 0.7, $y$ = 0.2, $z$ = 8.0). The solid lines of equation $x(n+1) = x(n)$ are shown in (b) and (d). This figure replicates fig. 5 of Hastings & Powell, except their fig. 5 (E), which is partly reproduced in our fig. 2 (d).
