Discussion

We were able to replicate the chaotic behaviour displayed by Hastings & Powell's model. The resulting behavior is indeed very sensible to the initial conditions, showing increasingly diverging trajectories (fig 2.) for slightly different parameters, as well as unending oscillations (fig 1.). The bifurcation diagrams (fig. 3) further confirm the existence of chaos by illustrating the presence of cyclic behavior for some values and chaotic intervals for others, hence the extreme sensibility of the system to $b_1$ values. As for the Poincaré sections (fig. 4 (a, c)), they plotted (x,y) coordinates of points of the phase plots that theoretically coincided with the plane in the "handle" of the teacup-shaped diagrams. The Poincaré sections being almost unidimensional, we considered, as explained in the original paper, a single variable within our Poincaré maps (fig. 4 (b, d)). The slopes of these latter graphs therefore also denoted chaos, as specified by Hastings and Powell.

As mentioned earlier, the difference between our fig. 1 and fig. 2 and Hastings & Powell's original ones do not alter the results interpretation. Without the exact same initial conditions, such difference is to be expected with a system exhibiting chaotic behavior.
## Nécessaire de répéter? ou d'ajouter autre chose? J'ajouterai peut-être un petit truc et ça donnerait ça:
For figures 1a, 1b, 1c and 2, the shape of the cycles and oscillations are similar to Hastings and Powell's. As mentioned earlier, the slight differences are due to the fact that we surely did not use the exact same initial conditions as the original authors. Such difference is to be expected with a system exhibiting chaotic behavior and do not alter the results interpretation.
## Francis approves!##

## Sûrement trop long, je ne sais pas vraiment quoi dire à part spéculer
The difference between our fig. 3 and Hastings & Powell's bifurcation diagram is more intriguing. Admittedly, we could not figure out exactly what Hastings & Powell's method was, and some elements such as identifying maxima values by increasing $b_1$ first, then by decreasing it, did not make sense to us. Our method should be appropriate, theoretically, to select only values that are primary local maxima, and it did seem to work very well for most values; yet, the broad range of values at $b_1$ = 3.1 that we observed instead of a dichotomy is hard to explain. It seems unlikely that the problem could be related to our arbitrary threshold of 66% or to our identification of a local maximum, because we would then be either missing some lower values or having too many, not having more in between. The timeseries of all values of $z$ (not presented here) for $b_1$ = 3.1 confirms that there are "intermediate" maxima values, which should be selected by any proper method. We suggest that the difference might be due to the algorithms used for the numerical integration in our two studies. It is possible that the relationship between the parameters at this point is such that a small difference in algorithm might have an important impact. It is also possible that their algorithm came up with an unstable solution and a system that did not reach cycling behavior, such as ours for certain values past $b_1$ = 5.01, but that Hastings & Powell's method selected some values anyways, explaining the behavior at $b_1$ = 3.1. ## N'explique pas le gap à 2.35, mais il y a des valeurs sur la figure 4a, c'est juste sur la 4c qu'il en manque. Pour moi c'est une affaire de qualité de l'image rendu là...

While we also found chaos for values of $b_2$ other than the default one of 2.0, both smaller or greater, we do not totally agree with Hastings & Powell that "chaos is more likely for larger values of $b_2$". As fig. S1 and S2 show, chaos can be quite likely for both smaller or larger values. We find important to note, however, that at a certain value of $b_2$, $z$ converges and starts to crash, thus exhibiting non chaotic behavior within a certain range of $b_1$ values. This crash is to be expected when looking at the original dimensional parameters, so it is possible that Hastings & Powell simply chose not to reach this limit in their analyses, as they were only interested in biologically reasonable parameters likely to occur with the three species present.

We believe that our mixed results in attempting to replicate fig. 4 came from the algorithm we used to identify the points that coincided with the plane. For instance, we indeed had to specify a tolerance value (epsilon), which defined a region under and above the plane. Although we were able to precisely replicate the Poincaré sections for $b1$ = 3.0 (fig. 4 (a)) and 6.0 (fig. 4 (c)), the Poincaré maps need some refinement. For $b1$ = 3.0 (fig. 4 (b)), it lacked some points of the phase plots and included others that were closed yet non-coincident with the plane. For $b1$ = 6.0 (fig. 4 (d)), the discrepancy was more obvious, and might be due to the more chaotic behavior of the system under this parameter, observed for example from the larger width of its "handle" (compare axis intervals of fig. 4 (a, c)). We are still working on improving our algorithms to adequately replicate Hastings and Powell's Poincaré maps.

# Conclusion ## (vraiment pas sûr, c'est une suggestion) Elo: j'ai tourné cela un peu plus critique si ça vous convient
We have succeeded in replicating Hastings & Powell's model and its main findings, as our results confirm chaos arising in a three species food chain in continuous time. In general, the model, including its equations and parameters, was well described by the authors. The most significant flaws of Hastings & Powell's paper in terms of replication were the absence of the values of the initial conditions which have a huge impact on a chaotic system, and the insufficient description of certain methods. Consequently, there are slight differences between our results and theirs. Furthermore, since we tried to keep our implementation as close as possible to the original one, some steps did rely on arbitrary thresholds (for instance for the primary local maxima or the Poincaré sections and maps boundaries). Hence, our replication is somewhat sparsely flexible and possibly could not be applied to a broader range of parameter values. We suggest that an interesting step forward would be to train machine-learning algorithms, such as neural networks, to identify chaotic behavior and its boundaries, in order to obtain an even better performing implementation.
